RFE: API iteration device/fleet (#247)
flightctl/flightctl: docs/enhancements/fep-000-api-device-fleet.md

for the management of individual devices in a way that we can integrate with other
management systems.

## Motivation

We need agreement on the API design direction and the semantics of the API to be able to
implement and grow the flightctl service.

### Goals

* Define the format and behavior of the Device and Fleet APIs

* Allow the management of individual fleetless devices on a smaller scale,
  as an integration mechanism for services like AAP and ACM.

* Allow the management of fleets of devices on a larger scale, via gitops or
  API.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

### Device API

The device API is divided into multiple endpoints, some user facing, and other device/facing,
this design facilitates cleaner RBAC control of the endpoint access.

#### `/device/{name}` User/Admin facing API

This endpoint can be accessed by the administrator or external systems to
manage individual devices, also internally from the fleet specifications
for devices.

When managing a device through a fleet, flightctl is responsible
of maintaining the device spec in sync with the fleet spec; in this case
write access is only possible for the modification of labels and other metadata

> through this API.

Reviewer: We should break out a section that describes this un managed state in detail.

The proposed changes include:

* Reincorporating device.spec as a visible part through this fronted API.
* Adding a managementMode field to the device.spec, this field can be set to "fleet" or "manual".
* The device.spec.os.image contains a reference to the image to be used for the device.
* The device.spec.containers contains a list of container patterns to be watched on the device (as in the fleet spec)
* The device.spec.systemd contains a list of systemd service patterns to be watches on the device (as in the fleet spec)
* The device.spec.config contains a list of config items
* The config items could be inline definition of config files (inline)
* Some config items reference exteral configurations (k8s-secret, gitref- ...)

> * External references (image or config items) must support floating tags (latest, main, v1.0),

Reviewer: Yeah we should drive best practices through our APIS when possible. Although hash collision is technically possible I think given a sane ENV this is very low probability. Comparing that to nondeterministic options I think its worth strong consideration.

>   some external items are actually non-versioned, so are inherently floating.

Reviewer 2: How can an ops persona understand
1. What is the current content that the service is offering a device?
2. What is the current content running on a device?

Author: This would be the equivalent of your debug devspec command , we should maintain that. I would say that may be we should convert it into

flightctl get device/xxxxxxx --rendered

and convert the output for users into all-yaml for readability.

##### Expected behaviour regarding external references with floating tags

Changes on external references is monitored and acted on (git branches,

> device images, secrets), the device controller should re-evaluate the device

Author: also for fleets.

spec and apply the changes.

Several mechanisms can be used to track external references:
* Polling
* Webhooks

> #### `/device/{name}/rendered` (device side)

Author: ```suggestion
#### `/device/{name}/rendered` (device side, and admin read)
```

This endpoint is used by the device agent to retrieve the rendered device spec, this endpoint is
read-only, each device can only access it's own device rendered spec based on the device
certificate identification or an administrator (for debug purposes).

The proposed changes include:

> * adding a version field, which identifies the version of the configuration.

Author: ack then no need to add it here. Thanks
```suggestion
```

> * rendering the config details in yaml format instead of a json blob (better for human readability while debugging)

Reviewer: Can you elaborate on what  "config details" means.  In general I would expect any changes to wire format to be based on performance. Perhaps a more complete example for the problem would be useful.

Reviewer: I think I understand that you want to change the format of the spec files on disk for the agent.

Author: I was talking about the API by continuing to use a normal structured schema instead of a json blob for now.

Is it really that different in terms of bytes to use json or yaml?
```bash
[majopela@centauro examples]$ yq -p yaml -o json fleet.yaml -I 0
{"apiVersion":"v1alpha1","kind":"Fleet","metadata":{"name":"default"},"spec":{"selector":{"matchLabels":{"fleet":"default"}},"template":{"metadata":{"labels":{"fleet":"default"}},"spec":{"os":{"image":"quay.io/redhat/rhde:9.2"},"config":[{"name":"base","configType":"GitConfigProviderSpec","gitRef":{"repository":"defaultRepo","targetRevision":"main","path":"/basic-nginx-demo/configuration"}},{"name":"motd-update","configType":"InlineConfigProviderSpec","inline":{"ignition":{"version":"3.4.0"},"storage":{"files":[{"contents":{"source":"data:,This%20system%20is%20managed%20by%20flightctl.%0A"},"mode":422,"overwrite":true,"path":"/etc/motd"}]}}}],"systemd":{"matchPatterns":["chronyd.service"]}}}}}
[majopela@centauro examples]$ yq -p yaml -o json fleet.yaml -I 0 | wc --bytes
703
[majopela@centauro examples]$ cat fleet.yaml | wc --bytes
940
```

well a 25%, not bad... :)

I would expect that when our APIs stabilize, we should move on to a binary protocol like gRPC for the agent side, reducing the footprint. There is a bigger difference in there.

Anyway, I will remove this point. I think JSON is probably a good compromise between size and versatility. Perhaps, as you say, we should write YAML to disk to make it easier to debug while maintaining healthier over-the-wire communication.

Reviewer: >  we should move on to a binary protocol like gRPC for the agent side, reducing the footprint. There is a bigger difference in there.

I would like to understand the priority of moving the transport protocol to HTTP/2. Is this a roadmap item? Should we begin describing it? With gRPC-gateway we can support both gRPC and JSON.

Author: Ok, but I'd try to render into yaml for readability , or may be when printing to the user or saving to disk we could re-render it in a tabulated format for debugability

Reviewer: It would make sense that the cli had support for printing to yaml. I believe that solves this problem without code change to agent/server.

Author: Yes I think that would be a good solution based on the conversation with avishay.

Author: I would defer gRPC for later, when our APIs stabilise, as gRPC requires tracking of the API versions with more care.

> * the config field is a list of *inline* config items. Using a separate schema for this field which won't allow other config
>   types with external references.

Author: ```suggestion
* the config field is a list of *inline* config items. Using a separate schema for this field which won't allow other config
  types with external references.
```

From the discussion, this would remain as a json blob string instead.

Behavior changes:
* If a device configuration is not yet rendered for some reason, FC will queue the device for rendering and instruct

>   the device to try again later by returning 204 No Content.

Author: Ack, changed.

if a device stops reporting to this endpoint in the expected timelines will be considered offline.

### Fleet API

Fleet is an automation layer on top of Device API, the DeviceTemplate is a mechanism to control drift
and enforce policy across devices in a fleet.

A DeviceTemplate is a template for a device spec, it's a way to define group specific configuration.

We are proposing extension mechanisms to this API to allow for more complex configurations where
device labels or name would influence the configuration generated to the device.

https://github.com/flightctl/flightctl/pull/248

#### Expected behavior

When fleet.speec.template.metadata or fleet.spec.template.spec is updated, the Flet deployment controller
starts rolling out that update to devices. This update can take long (depending on the upgrade strategy)

When a template is applied to a specific device via the Device API:
* Floating tags for external references (os image, git refs, etc..) get converted to stable tags (hashes),
  this gives flightctl the ability to check images being deployed on devices before the device could auto pick-up

>   a floating tag. (i.e. checks verifying the installation of the flightctl agent, and configuration)

Author: > This is too late IMO. We need to freeze at the fleet level, perform all of the checks there, and only then proceed to roll out to devices.

I guess you are referring to the case where:
1) We start rolling out devices, i.e. to image quay.io/myproject/image:latest pointing to aabbccddeeff
2) Some devices are frozen to aabbccddeeff
3) The :latest tag changes to 001122334455
4) Some devices will point to 001122334455

The idea here is that the devices should then slowly converge into the new version, when the controller detects that the hash has changed, the devices with the older tag will be updated to the newer one.

I believe that when customers start using floating tags, specially like this "latest" they must assume this type of issue (which would slowly converge in the desired state : all devices having the same version).

And if they want to avoid something like this, then they must use "tags" or less floating tags (per/version) ... or simply hashes. We should document and recommend here.

The same issue happens in kubernetes if you are deploying lots of pods.

>   a floating tag. (i.e. checks verifying the installation of the flightctl agent, and configuration)

Reviewer 2: How I think it should work:
1. When quay.io/myproject/image:latest points to aabbccddeeff, FC calls it "v1", and starts rolling it out to all devices.
2. When it points to 001122334455, FC calls it "v2", and rolls it out to devices.

When someone sees a device running v1, they actually know what it's running.  It's also obvious how many devices are running aabbccddeeff, what the success rate is, and we can roll back to known-good hashes.

Otherwise, as currently described in the doc, FC is rolling out some spec.  The meaning behind it changes at some point.  The success rate suddenly drops.  There is no clear indication of what's going on because the fleet description didn't change.  So we roll back to some version that worked, but the fleet doesn't remember any hashes that worked - it only knows branches.

>   a floating tag. (i.e. checks verifying the installation of the flightctl agent, and configuration)

Author: What I am saying is that, that "uncertainty" must be admissible because the administrator is selecting a floating tag, which has the ability to float over time, and that we "do not recommend" (in docs we should do that).

We could go to the lengths of alleviating this problem, i.e. by pre-scanning all devices in a fleet and making a reference manifest (similar to the manifest openshift has for all the images)... that manifest would contain a list of all possible references on a fleet, and then when deploying we would use that instead of using dynamic resolution.

But, I think this is something we should not get into. we should just state: "This is a risk you are assuming if you use floating tags..." it could take more time to converge, you could find devices with different versions (as it happens in Kubernetes with floating tags and pods...)

>   a floating tag. (i.e. checks verifying the installation of the flightctl agent, and configuration)

Reviewer 2: Let's keep variables as a separate topic.

Let's say a user supplies a tag or branch in the fleet specification, and the contents of that tag/branch change (either on purpose or accidentally), then the devices stop acting as a fleet.

The fleet controller simply copies the branch/tag to the specs of the devices.  There will be some observability and policy around how this is rolled out (batches, status, etc.).  Let's say the fleet was successfully updated.  Then suddenly, someone pushes to git, and the system breaks.  Devices start updating to the new hashes on their own, without obeying the fleet policies, and start failing.  None of this activity is visible on the fleet level.  There's no automatic rollback because this update was done outside of the fleet context.

I would say that this behavior is broken.

>   a floating tag. (i.e. checks verifying the installation of the flightctl agent, and configuration)

Author: > Let's keep variables as a separate topic.
> 
> Let's say a user supplies a tag or branch in the fleet specification, and the contents of that tag/branch change (either on purpose or accidentally), then the devices stop acting as a fleet.
> 
> The fleet controller simply copies the branch/tag to the specs of the devices. There will be some observability and policy around how this is rolled out (batches, status, etc.). Let's say the fleet was successfully updated. Then suddenly, someone pushes to git, and the system breaks. Devices start updating to the new hashes on their own, without obeying the fleet policies, and start failing. None of this activity is visible on the fleet level. There's no automatic rollback because this update was done outside of the fleet context.

Ok, I suspect I didn't do my best to explain this on the RFE:

This RFE says (or I tried to say that) that the fleet controller freezes the tag in the device.

However, we allow devices to be populated with floating tags when a fleet does not manage them (i.e. a external system).

> I would say that this behavior is broken.

>   a floating tag. (i.e. checks verifying the installation of the flightctl agent, and configuration)

Author: Resolving based on our discussion here, but feel free to re-open https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/C01KER8QV33/p1715593490026039

devices as well as fleets of devices is a fundamental piece of flightctl.

The Fleet API must serve as a way to manage groups of devices while still allowing
for the management of individual devices in a way that we can integrate with other
management systems.

## Motivation

We need agreement on the API design direction and the semantics of the API to be able to
implement and grow the flightctl service.

### Goals

* Define the format and behavior of the Device and Fleet APIs

* Allow the management of individual fleetless devices on a smaller scale,
  as an integration mechanism for services like AAP and ACM.

* Allow the management of fleets of devices on a larger scale, via gitops or
  API.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

### Device API

The device API is divided into multiple endpoints, some user facing, and other device/facing,
this design facilitates cleaner RBAC control of the endpoint access.

#### `/device/{name}` User/Admin facing API

This endpoint can be accessed by the administrator or external systems to
manage individual devices, also internally from the fleet specifications
for devices.

The proposed changes include:

> * Reincorporating device.spec as a visible part through this fronted API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Reincorporating device.spec as a visible part through this frontend API.
```

* Adding a managementMode field to the device.spec, this field can be set to "fleet" or "manual".
* The device.spec.os.image contains a reference to the image to be used for the device.
* The device.spec.containers contains a list of container patterns to be watched on the device (as in the fleet spec)

> * The device.spec.systemd contains a list of systemd service patterns to be watches on the device (as in the fleet spec)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The device.spec.systemd contains a list of systemd service patterns to be watched on the device (as in the fleet spec)
```

* The device.spec.config contains a list of config items
* The config items could be inline definition of config files (inline)

> * Some config items reference exteral configurations (k8s-secret, gitref- ...)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Some config items reference external configurations (k8s-secret, gitref- ...)
```

Author: lol ':D

* External references (image or config items) must support floating tags (latest, main, v1.0), although
  in fleet mode the floating tags will be converted to stable tags (hashes) before being applied to the device.
  some external items are actually non-versioned, so are inherently floating.

Then, depending of the managementMode, the device.spec will provide different levels of writability. 

##### `/device/{name}` with managementMode: fleet

When managing a device through a fleet, flightctl is responsible
for maintaining the device spec in sync with the fleet spec; in this case
write access is only possible for the modification of labels and other metadata
through this API.

A device can be moved into an manual management state by flipping the managementMode

> field. This is useful to allow temporary drift for debugging specific devices.

Reviewer 3: And a possible integration workflow for ACM registration could involve the injection of inline configs in the device spec (and not in the fleet spec).

  the device to try again later by returning 202 Accepted.

#### `/device/{name}/status` (device side)

This endpoint is used by the device agent to report the status of the device, this endpoint is write-only,
each device can only access it's own device status based on the device certificate identification.

The result of this write will be exposed on the `device/{name}` endpoint as part of the status field.

Reporting to this endpoint also serves as a heartbeat mechanism, the device agent should report the status,
if a device stops reporting to this endpoint in the expected timelines will be considered offline.

### Fleet API

Fleet is an automation layer on top of Device API, the DeviceTemplate is a mechanism to control drift
and enforce policy across devices in a fleet.

A DeviceTemplate is a template for a device spec, it's a way to define group specific configuration.

We are proposing extension mechanisms to this API to allow for more complex configurations where
device labels or name would influence the configuration generated to the device.

https://github.com/flightctl/flightctl/pull/248

#### Expected behavior

> When fleet.speec.template.metadata or fleet.spec.template.spec is updated, the Flet deployment controller

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When fleet.spec.template.metadata or fleet.spec.template.spec is updated, the Fleet deployment controller
```

Author: ooops:D

  as an integration mechanism for services like AAP and ACM.

* Allow the management of fleets of devices on a larger scale, via gitops or
  API.

* Define templating mechanism for the device spec template configuration in fleets,
  based on labels and other metadata.

### Non-Goals

* Not defining the whole API in exhaustive form, this document is proposing changes
  to the existing MVP implementation.

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

## Proposal

### Device API

The device API is divided into multiple endpoints, some user facing, and other device/facing,
this design facilitates cleaner RBAC control of the endpoint access.

#### User/Admin facing

The fronted user/admin facing API endpoint is found in `/device/{name}`,
this endpoint can be accessed by the administrator or external systems to
manage individual devices. When a device is managed by a fleet flightctl is responsible
of maintaining the device spec in sync with the fleet spec, in this case write access is
possible for the purpose of the modification of labels and other metadata.

The proposed changes include:

> * Adding a managementMode field to the device.spec, this field can be set to "fleet" or "manual".

Reviewer 4: I believe the idea is to make this enum for potential future extensibility. If we go this route, we shouldn't call it "fleet", though, as this'd be a layering violation: The Device API must not know anything about higher layer APIs like the Fleet API.

However, I'm not convinced we should have this field at all: It's a duplicate way for users to express the intent to have a device managed or not, as we already support this through the fleet label-selector / setting the "owner" on a device. Also, it's semantic isn't clear: What if the field was set to "fleet" but no fleet selected the device?

If we absolutely want another layer of protecting the user from themselves, we could use a "pauseUpdates" or "suspendManagement" or something field or so that expresses the purpose better. And then maybe it should be a label/annotation instead of a spec?

> * Adding a managementMode field to the device.spec, this field can be set to "fleet" or "manual".

Reviewer 2: I don't love magic labels.  Why not leave it in the spec?

> * Adding a managementMode field to the device.spec, this field can be set to "fleet" or "manual".

Author: There are some reasons why "magic labels" aren't always great, i.e.: There is no clear contract of field in the API, there is a contract, yes... in documentation, but you cannot find about it in the openapi doc for example, or while writing code using a client library. On the other hand, it's great for filtering in this use case.

There are some comments @fzdarsky that explain why it makes more sense to leave it out of spec (writablity/access)

An alternative could be, if we don't want "magic labels" to use a separate top level field:

i.e.
```
metadata:
  - 

management:
   suspended: true

spec:
  -
status:

```

> * Adding a managementMode field to the device.spec, this field can be set to "fleet" or "manual".

Reviewer 4: > 1. A device being managed manually is different than a device that happens not to match any selectors at the moment.

In how far? From the Device API layer's perspective, a human operator or a workflow automation or a fleet automation... these are just API users.

> 2. Artificially changing a device's labels to (possibly temporarily) exclude it from a fleet is an awkward UX.

Yeah, I agree. Though IMHO not more than having to double-express an intent. However, I feel the intent "to (possibly temporarily) exclude if from a fleet" is different than "to switch between manually and fleet managed". The former is what I meant above with a label or annotation that indicate to the automation layer to exclude the device (effectively, it becomes part of the higher layer's API).

> * Adding a managementMode field to the device.spec, this field can be set to "fleet" or "manual".

Author: Ok, I don't like my own proposal. management.suspended could be interpreted in a different way.. that regardless of what we write here... it will not propagate to the device... I am withdrawing that proposal. Back to magic labels for now

> * Adding a managementMode field to the device.spec, this field can be set to "fleet" or "manual".

Author: This is transparent to the agent; the agent does not need to modify any behavior. It simply receives an expected state, calculated on the server side.

# EP: Definition of the Fleet and Device API spec
<!-- this format is inspired by the K8S KEP format https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes/enhancements/master/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md -->
## Summary

The Device API, and Fleet API, and the dynamics of managing single fleetless
devices as well as fleets of devices is a fundamental piece of flightctl.

The Fleet API must serve as a way to manage groups of devices while still allowing
for the management of individual devices in a way that we can integrate with other
management systems.

## Motivation

We need agreement on the API design direction and the semantics of the API to be able to
implement and grow the flightctl service.

### Goals

* Define the format and behavior of the Device and Fleet APIs

* Allow the management of individual fleetless devices on a smaller scale,
  as an integration mechanism for services like AAP and ACM.

* Allow the management of fleets of devices on a larger scale, via gitops or
  API.

* Change API fields to provide a more consistent experience.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

### Device API

The device API is divided into multiple endpoints, some user facing, and other device/facing,

> this design facilitates cleaner RBAC control of the endpoint access.

Author: I think authentication types is just an implementation detail and there is no risk in this definition.

If we wanted to do that, we could do it, in fact I am already hinting here that those are separate endpoints even though currently we have them in a single server for convenience.

> this design facilitates cleaner RBAC control of the endpoint access.

Author: I have changed endpoints -> parts to be more precise with the current implementation.

    - name: sshd.service
      loadState: running
      activeState: active
  systemInfo:
    architecture: arm64
    bootID: 87f7e27e-bdc0-42b1-b909-6dc81fe43ea2
    machineID: fa31890ae222449abb00ff90ed801674
    measurements:
      pcr01: "0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000"
      ...
      pcr16: "0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000"
    operatingSystem: linux
  updatedAt: "2024-04-30T15:06:19Z"
```

##### `/device/{name}` with managementMode: fleet

When managing a device through a fleet, flightctl is responsible
for maintaining the device spec in sync with the fleet spec; in this case
write access is only possible for the modification of labels and other metadata
through this API, `spec.managementMode` can also be set to `manual`.

A device can be moved into an manual management state by flipping the `spec.managementMode`
field. This is useful to allow temporary drift for debugging specific devices. As soon
as this field is flipped back to `fleet`, the device controller will roll back the device
configuration to the fleet mandated configuration and remove any modifications made to the
device spec.

> Devices set to `spec.managementMode: manual`, but with a `metadata.owner` fleet , must signal

Reviewer 2: I guess it depends on the semantics of "managementMode".  If it means "don't manage this device as part of a fleet", then it shouldn't be owned by a fleet.  If it means "pause management", then the owner should be retained.

While devices are managed by fleets, all floating tags are resolved to stable hashes, but
when a device is managed manually, the floating tags can be used, see the next sub-section
for additional details.

###### Expected behaviour regarding external references with floating tags

Changes on external references is monitored and acted on (git branches,
device images, secrets), the device controller should re-evaluate the device
spec and apply the changes to the rendered version which will be exposed
on the `/device/{name}/rendered` endpoint.

Several mechanisms can be used to track external references:
* Polling
* Webhooks

#### `/device/{name}/rendered` (device side)
This endpoint is used by the device agent to retrieve the rendered device spec, this endpoint is
read-only, each device can only access it's own device rendered spec based on the device
certificate identification, an administrator can access any device rendered spec for debug purposes.

The agent can pass two parameters: `version`and `owner` if those haven't changed the API will return
204 No Content, if the version or fleet has changed the API will return the rendered spec.

Change proposed:

> * The parameter name `fleet` is changed to `owner` to be consistent with the metadata field.

Reviewer 2: Since the agent treats both strings as opaque, FC should maybe provide a single string and call it something like "latestSeenID."

Reviewer 2: Right now it's owner plus version.  I'm suggesting to just have some token/identifier for the specification.  LatestSpecificationID?

Reviewer 2: Yes, resourceversion sounds right

Behavior changes:
* If a device configuration is not yet rendered for some reason, FC will queue the device for rendering and instruct
  the device to try again later by returning 202 Accepted.

The administrator can find the fully rendered device spec by using the following cmdline command:
```shell
flightctl get device/xxxxxxx --rendered
```

> The JSON blob configuration exposed to the device in the /device/{name}/rendered endpoint

Reviewer 4: We should switch back the returned format from RenderedDeviceSpec to DeviceSpec while we’re at it.

Author: We cannot use plain DeviceSpec since it contains many options the device cannot process (k8s secret, git secret, of future external refs).

Reviewer 4: Can this not be a convention between service and agent to just use inlined config types on that interface (like with MCS/MCD)?

Author: If you are worried about the nested JSON format, we could expose a single ignition file in yaml.

BTW I think there is not a lot of benefit in discussing this part of the API. IMHO the important part is the frontend, and expected behavior, this could very well end up being another/a binary protocol

Reviewer 4: You're right, this RFE should only focus on the user-facing API, and this is about the device-facing API that users shouldn't make assumptions on.

Just to clarify: The nested JSON isn't the concern; it was the same before in both FC and OCP. And by using the `-o json` flag in the CLI there also wasn't a concern filtering through `jq` if necessary. No, the point was to remain future-proof as the configuration format may change from Ignition to ConfigMaps and Secrets and potentially other items for app management, too, and to keep the same approach as MCO.

while compacted for transport, should be formated in a way that it's easy to read by humans

> when printed out to the console, by adding tabs and newlines.

Reviewer 2: I'd say that non-formatted may be useful, and those who want it formatted should pipe the output to jq.

Author: But it's hard to pass to jq, because it's embedded in yaml.

What would be the use case? When consumed by the user, this API is only expected to be used for debugging.

We could add a flag not to prettify output, but IMHO, the default should be targeting the main use case (debugging by 
a user).

Reviewer 2: Today, GET /api/v1/devices/{name}/specification returns JSON.

Author: It's not plain json today, only the config field.

```
./bin/flightctl debug devspec f07526ed0c3c251d8764c83833f5135824375c06f46e3d3feb080fc29875a4c3
config: '{"ignition":{"config":{"replace":{"verification":{}}},"proxy":{},"security":{"tls":{}},"timeouts":{},"version":"3.4.0"},"kernelArguments":{},"passwd":{},"storage":{"files":[{"group":{},"overwrite":true,"path":"/etc/motd","user":{},"contents":{"source":"data:,This%20system%20is%20managed%20by%20flightctl.%0A","verification":{}},"mode":422},{"group":{},"overwrite":true,"path":"/etc/microshift/manifests/agent-registration.yaml","user":{"name":"root"},"contents":{"source":"data:text/plain;charset=utf-8;base64,Ci0tLQph...10K","verification":{}},"mode":420},{"group":{},"overwrite":true,"path":"/etc/microshift/manifests/deployment.yaml","user":{"name":"root"},"contents":{"source":"data:text/plain;charset=utf-8;base64,YXB...DAK","verification":{}},"mode":420},{"group":{},"overwrite":true,"path":"/etc/microshift/manifests/kustomization.yaml","user":{"name":"root"},"contents":{"source":"data:text/plain;charset=utf-8;base64,cmVzb3VyY2VzOgotIG5hbWVzcGFjZS55YW1sCi0gZGVwbG95bWVudC55YW1sCi0gc2VydmljZS55YW1sCi0gcm91dGUueWFtbAotIGNyZC1rbHVzdGVybGV0LnlhbWwKLSBhZ2VudC1yZWdpc3RyYXRpb24ueWFtbAo=","verification":{}},"mode":420},{"group":{},"overwrite":true,"path":"/etc/microshift/manifests/namespace.yaml","user":{"name":"root"},"contents":{"source":"data:text/plain;charset=utf-8;base64,YXB..==","verification":{}},"mode":420},{"group":{},"overwrite":true,"path":"/etc/microshift/manifests/route.yaml","user":{"name":"root"},"contents":{"source":"data:text/plain;charset=utf-8;base64,YX...mUK","verification":{}},"mode":420},{"group":{},"overwrite":true,"path":"/etc/microshift/manifests/service.yaml","user":{"name":"root"},"contents":{"source":"data:text/plain;charset=utf-8;base64,YXB...MK","verification":{}},"mode":420},{"group":{},"overwrite":true,"path":"/etc/crio/openshift-pull-secret","user":{"name":"root"},"contents":{"source":"data:text/plain;charset=utf-8;base64,.....WlsIjoicm5vcmllZ2FAcmVkaGF0LmNvbSJ9fX0K","verification":{}},"mode":420}]},"systemd":{}}'
containers: {}
os:
  image: quay.io/flightctl/flightctl-agent-basic-nginx:latest
owner: ""
systemd:
  matchPatterns:
  - microshift.service
  - crio.service
  - flightctl-agent.service
templateVersion: "2024-04-24T10:30:17Z"

```

Reviewer 4: You should be able to use the `-o json` flag on the CLI.

Author: Ok, I will remove any details about output formating, and I propose an RFE is started for the device side transport when we are ready for that.

#### `/device/{name}/status` (device side)

This endpoint is used by the device agent to report the status of the device, this endpoint is write-only,
each device can only access it's own device status based on the device certificate identification.

The result of this write will be exposed on the `/device/{name}` endpoint as part of the status field.

Reporting to this endpoint also serves as a heartbeat mechanism, the device agent should report the status,
if a device stops reporting to this endpoint in the expected timelines will be considered offline.

> NOTE: When optimization is required in the future we could implement an additional endpoint to report heartbeats,

Reviewer 4: There may be other ways, e.g. implementing a delta update. Not sure we should detail one possible option here?

Author: 👍 I will remove that for now, It would deserve it's own spec and it's an off-topic.

i.e. `/device/{name}/heartbeat` to reduce the amount of data being sent to the server. This heartbeat could include
a hash or fingerprint of the device status content. The server could request the device to post full status (i.e.
if the status on the server went stale, was lost or restored from backup).

### Fleet API

Fleet is an automation layer on top of Device API, the DeviceTemplate is a mechanism to control drift
and enforce policy across devices in a fleet.

A DeviceTemplate is a template for a device spec, it's a way to define group specific configuration.

We are proposing extension mechanisms to this API to allow for more complex configurations where
device labels or name would influence the configuration generated to the device.

https://github.com/flightctl/flightctl/pull/248

#### Expected behavior

> When fleet.spec.template.metadata or fleet.spec.template.spec is updated, the Flet deployment controller

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When fleet.spec.template.metadata or fleet.spec.template.spec is updated, the Fleet deployment controller
```

Reviewer 4: Shorten to `fleet.spec.template`? Or do we expect anything under that which does not cause an update?

# EP: Definition of the Fleet and Device API spec
<!-- this format is inspired by the K8S KEP format https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes/enhancements/master/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md -->
## Summary

The Device API, and Fleet API, and the dynamics of managing individual
devices as well as fleets of devices is a fundamental piece of flightctl.

The Fleet API must serve as a way to manage groups of devices while still allowing
for the management of individual devices in a way that we can integrate with other
management systems.

## Motivation

We need agreement on the API design direction and the semantics of the API to be able to
implement and grow the flightctl service.

### Goals

* Define the format and behavior of the Device and Fleet APIs

* Allow the management of individual fleetless devices on a smaller scale,
  as an integration mechanism for services like AAP and ACM.

* Allow the management of fleets of devices on a larger scale, via gitops or
  API.

> * Change API fields to provide a more consistent experience.

Author: ```suggestion
* Change API fields to provide a more consistent experience.

* Enable temporary/manual drift of fleet-managed devices for debug purposes.
```

intended to illustrate the flow of information between the user/system and the device.

```mermaid
block-beta
columns 1
  user(["User"])

  space

  block
    frontEndpoint["/device/{name}"]
  end

  user --> frontEndpoint
  frontEndpoint --> user

  space
  block
    metadata
    devSpec["spec"]
    devStatus["status"]
  end

  space

  frontEndpoint --> metadata
  frontEndpoint --> devSpec

  block
     renderedEndpoint["/device/{name}/rendered"]
     statusEndpoint["/device/{name}/status"]
  end

  space

  statusEndpoint --> devStatus
  statusEndpoint --> devStatus
  devSpec --> renderedEndpoint
  renderedEndpoint --> Device
  Device --> statusEndpoint

  Device(["Device"])

  style frontEndpoint fill:#969,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px
  style renderedEndpoint fill:#969,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px
  style statusEndpoint fill:#969,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px
  ```

#### `/device/{name}` User facing method

This endpoint can be accessed by the user or external systems to
manage individual devices, also internally from the fleet specifications
for devices.

The proposed changes include:

* Reincorporating device.spec as a visible part through this frontend API.

> * Adding a managementMode field to the device.spec, this field can be set to "fleet" or "manual".

Author: ```suggestion
```

After RFE spec, we wouldn't need this field.

Everything would be controlled by the metadata.owner field, and the "flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused" label

* The `device.spec.os.image` contains a reference to the image to be used for the device.

* The `device.spec.templateVersion` field is moved to `device.metadata.resourceVersion` opaque string identifies

>   the version of the device spec, this is used for tracking changes. This is moved from the spec level, so
>   when we write in the spec field, the contents are then not modified by the server.

Author: ```suggestion
  the version of the device spec, this is used for tracking changes. This is moved from the metadata level, so
  when we write in the spec field, the contents are then not modified by the server.
```

> * The `device.spec.containers` contains a list of container patterns to be watched on the device (as in the fleet spec)

Author: ```suggestion
* The `device.spec.monitoring.containers` contains a list of container patterns to be watched on the device (as in the fleet spec)
```

* The `device.spec.systemd` contains a list of systemd service patterns to be watched on the device (as in the fleet spec)

* The `device.spec.config` contains a list of config items

* The config items could be inline definition of config files (`InlineConfigProviderSpec`)

* Some config items reference external configurations (`KubernetesSecretProviderSpec`, `GitConfigProviderSpec`)

* `GitConfigProviderSpec` config types add a `mountPath` field for consistency, in the same way k8s secrets add such field.

* External references (image or config items) must support floating tags (`latest`, `main`, `v1.0`), although

>   *in fleet mode the floating tags will be frozen as hashes* on the device spec.

Author: ```suggestion
  **in fleet mode the floating tags will be frozen as hashes** on the device spec.
```

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    state "<b>Individual Device</b><br/><b>owner</b>: nil (API writtable)<br/><b>spec:</b> user writable // unmanaged" as Individual_Device
    state "<b>Fleet Device</b><br/><b>owner</b>: the-matching-fleet<br/><b>spec</b>: fleet-controller writable // managed" as Fleet_Device
    state "<b>Fleet Device (paused)</b><br/><b>owner</b>: the-matching-fleet<br/><b>spec</b>: user writable // management paused" as Fleet_Paused
    [*] --> Individual_Device
    Individual_Device --> Fleet_Device : matching fleet labels && owner == nil
    Fleet_Device --> Individual_Device : no matching fleet labels
    Fleet_Device --> Fleet_Paused : flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused
    Fleet_Paused--> Fleet_Device: ! flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused
    Fleet_Paused--> Individual_Device: no matching fleet labels
```

##### `/device/{name}` with no owner fleet (Individual Device)

Devices with no matching labels to a fleet are manually managed and start with no `metadata.owner`
reference, the fleet controller will not attempt to reconcile or configure the device in any way.

A `metadata.owner` field can be written through the API to associate the device to an external

> owner (like ACM or AAP, etc..), and prevent the fleet controller from managing the device in any way.

Author: ```suggestion
owner (like ACM or AAP, etc..) and prevent the fleet controller from managing the device in any way.
```

> If a fleet matches this device, and the device has `metadata.owner == nil` the fleet controller

Author: ```suggestion
If a fleet matches this device, and the device has empty `metadata.owner` the fleet controller
```

will claim the device, by setting `metadata.owner` to `Fleet/{fleet-name}`.

The `os.image` and configuration fields in this API support floating tags, and while the fleet manager
does freeze the tags to hashes, the user is free to setup the device spec with floating references.

###### Expected behaviour regarding external references with floating tags

> Changes on external references is monitored and acted on (git branches,

Author: ```suggestion
Changes on external references are monitored and acted on (git branches,
```

on the `/device/{name}/rendered` endpoint.

Several mechanisms can be used to track external references:
* Polling
* Webhooks

##### `/device/{name}` while managed by a fleet (Fleet Device)

When managing a device through a fleet, flightctl is responsible
for maintaining the device spec in sync with the fleet spec; in this case
*write access is only possible for the modification of labels and other metadata*
through this API except for the owner fleet.

> [!NOTE]
> Devices managed by a fleet have their floating tags resolved to stable hashes at this API
> level. This is done to ensure that the device is always in sync with the fleet spec.

The device will have an owner reference to the managing fleet, i.e.:

```yaml
  owner: Fleet/optical-inspector-production-fleet
```

###### Temporarily disabling fleet management (Fleet Device paused)

A user can temporarily stop fleet management of a device by setting the `flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused`
in the device labels, the fleet manager will ignore devices with this label for any subsequent
update or rollout.

This feature is intended to allow temporarily debugging a device without de-associating

> from the fleet. This will mean the the `metadata.owner` field is not cleared. 

Author: ```suggestion
from the fleet. This will mean the `metadata.owner` field is not cleared. 
```

> Devices set to `flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused` with a `metadata.owner` fleet must signal

Author: ```suggestion
Devices set to `flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused` with a `metadata.owner` starting with "Fleet/" must signal
```

a device status condition to indicate that the device is not being synchronized
to the owner fleet.

```yaml
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-30T15:06:20Z"
    message: This device is not in sync with the owner fleet.
    reason: Management Paused from flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused label.
    status: False
    type: Management
```

When a fleet owned device is moved back to fleet management (the label is cleared),
the status condition is removed, in additiona the fleet controller will roll
out (or back) the device configuration to the fleet mandated configuration and remove any
modifications manually made to the device spec.

###### Removing a device from a fleet

A device could be stripped from the labels associating it to a specific fleet, in such

> case the `metadata.owner` field will be cleared, and the device will need to be manually managed

Author: ```suggestion
case the `metadata.owner` field will be cleared by the fleet controller, and the device will need to be manually managed
```

or eventually associated to a different fleet.

> in this case a condition will be set to indicate that the device is not managed by any fleet.

Author: This condition would be inconsistent with devices that were never managed. I suggest we remove it. it should be clear by the empty owner field.

Reviewer 4: I agree. It mirrors the former management mode "manual" vs "fleet" spec item.

Author: Done.

```yaml
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-30T15:06:20Z"
    message: This device is not managed by any fleet.
    reason: Unmanaged
    status: False
    type: Management
```

###### Changing a device to a different fleet

> A device could be moved to a different fleet, in such case the `metadata.owner` field will be updated,
> and the device will be managed by the new fleet.

Author: ```suggestion
A device could be moved to a different fleet, in such case the `metadata.owner` field will be updated
by the fleet controller, and the device will be managed by the new fleet.
```

Change proposed:
* The parameter name `fleet` is changed to `owner` to be consistent with the metadata field.

Behavior changes:
* If a device configuration is not yet rendered for some reason, FC will queue the device for rendering and instruct
  the device to try again later by returning 202 Accepted.

The user can find the fully rendered device spec by using the following cmdline command:
```shell
flightctl get device/xxxxxxx --rendered
```

The JSON blob configuration exposed to the device in the /device/{name}/rendered endpoint
while compacted for transport, should be formated in a way that it's easy to read by humans
when printed out to the console, by adding tabs and newlines.

#### `/device/{name}/status` (device side)

This endpoint is used by the device agent to report the status of the device, this endpoint is write-only,
each device can only access it's own device status based on the device certificate identification.

The result of this write will be exposed on the `/device/{name}` endpoint as part of the status field.

Reporting to this endpoint also serves as a heartbeat mechanism, the device agent should report the status,

> if a device stops reporting to this endpoint in the expected timelines will be considered offline.

Author: ```suggestion
if a device stops reporting to this endpoint in the expected timelines, it will be considered offline.
```

* The config items could be inline definition of config files (`InlineConfigProviderSpec`)

* Some config items reference external configurations (`KubernetesSecretProviderSpec`, `GitConfigProviderSpec`)

* `GitConfigProviderSpec` config types add a `mountPath` field for consistency, in the same way k8s secrets add such field.

* External references (image or config items) must support floating tags (`latest`, `main`, `v1.0`), although
  **when managed from a fleet, the floating tags will be frozen as hashes** on the device spec by the
  fleet controller.

* Some external items are actually non-versioned like the K8s secrets, so are inherently floating.

Complete representation of the proposed device:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1alpha1
kind: Device
metadata:
  name: fab9839018890a88b898b980f8f809f8e8ac333761977d987a777a777a987ccce
  labels:
    site: factory-a
    deviceType: optical-inspector
    stage: production
  annotations:
    fleet-controller/resourceVersion: "optical-inspector-production-fleet-0000001" # the fleet controller uses this annotation to track the latest template applied
  owner: Fleet/optical-inspector-production-fleet

>   resourceVersion: "0001/hash/implementatio-specific"  # instead of templateVersion, hiding implementation specific details

Reviewer 4: see above; cannot be templateVersion

Author: uh I still need to fix the comments and annotations here on this yaml.

spec:
  os:
    image: quay.io/redhat/rhde:9.2
  config:
    - name: rendered-config
      configType: InlineConfigProviderSpec
      inline:
        ignition:
          version: 3.4.0
        storage:
          files:
            - contents:
                source: >-
                  data:,This%20system%20is%20managed%20by%20flightctl.%0A
              mode: 422
              overwrite: true
              path: "/etc/motd"

    - name: config-from-git
      configType: GitConfigProviderSpec
      repository: my-repo
      ref: v1.0.0
      path: /path/to/config/in/git

>       mountPath: /path/to/config/in/device

Reviewer: GitConfigProviderSpec would mean that the agent would clone the repo locally? Or is that taken care of server side and only the file is passed directly via IGN? Just making sure I understand how this is expected to work and if this configType is necessary for agent level spec.

Reviewer: Question:
- Do we currently have more than one configType `InlineConfigProviderSpec` that the agent supports?

Reviewer 2: Just as today, the server side merges all of the configs and serves ignition to the agent.

Reviewer: So to be clear the only template configType will be InlineConfigProviderSpec and the API's will not change here at all for the device?

Author: correct.

    - name: config-from-k8s-secret
      configType: KubernetesSecretProviderSpec
      name: my-secret
      namespace: my-namespace

>       mountPath: /path/to/config/in/device

Reviewer: Same question does this mean that the agent would need to have a kube client and pull from the device or would this happen server side and the rendered bytes are what is passed.

Reviewer 2: Same as above, the server side merges all of the configs and serves ignition to the agent.

    reason: AsExpected
    status: "True"
    type: Available
  containers:
    - id: fa31890ae222449abb00ff90ed801674
      name: my-container
      status: running
      image: quay.io/myorg/myimage:v1.0.0
      engine: podman
  systemdUnits:
    - name: chronyd.service
      loadState: running     #Q: those fields need clatification, not obvious what they mean
      activeState: active
    - name: sshd.service
      loadState: running
      activeState: active
  systemInfo: # The systemInfo field will likely change in future RFEs, i.e. measurements will probably
              # go away or change format (to provide specific quotes for specific PCRs)
    architecture: arm64
    bootID: 87f7e27e-bdc0-42b1-b909-6dc81fe43ea2
    machineID: fa31890ae222449abb00ff90ed801674
    measurements:
      pcr01: "0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000"
      ...
      pcr16: "0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000"
    operatingSystem: linux
  updatedAt: "2024-04-30T15:06:19Z"
```
##### Device state regarding fleet managment
This diagram illustrates what the following sections describe in text.
```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2

>     state "<b>Individual Device</b><br/><b>owner</b>: nil (API writtable)<br/><b>spec:</b> user writable // unmanaged" as Individual_Device

Reviewer 4: writtable -> writable

device images, secrets), the device controller should re-evaluate the device
spec and apply the changes to the rendered version which will be exposed
on the `/device/{name}/rendered` endpoint.

Several mechanisms can be used to track external references:
* Polling
* Webhooks

##### `/device/{name}` while managed by a fleet (Fleet Device)

When managing a device through a fleet, flightctl is responsible
for maintaining the device spec in sync with the fleet spec; in this case
*write access is only possible for the modification of labels and other metadata*
through this API except for the owner fleet.

> [!NOTE]
> Devices managed by a fleet have their floating tags resolved to stable hashes at this API
> level. This is done to ensure that the device is always in sync with the fleet spec.

The device will have an owner reference to the managing fleet, i.e.:

```yaml
  owner: Fleet/optical-inspector-production-fleet
```

#### `/device/{name}/rendered` (device and user read-only)
This endpoint is used by the device agent to retrieve the rendered device spec, this endpoint is
read-only, each device can only access it's own device rendered spec based on the device

> certificate identification, an user can access any device rendered spec for debug purposes.

Reviewer 4: an user -> a user

Should that be "admin" or "user with admin privileges"?

> The agent can pass: `resourceVersion` if this opaque field has not changed the API will return

Reviewer 4: "The agent can add the `resourceVersion` query parameter, passing the value from the `metadata.resourceVersion` field of the last device spec it received, in which case the API will..."

I just realised this is inconsistent with K8s, which would return the resource at the exact version requested (or a "410 Gone" error). Should we make this `knownResourceVersion`? Or add a `HEAD /device/{name}/rendered` method?

Author: Ok, after talking to avishay this morning I am proposing an updated version. We will expose renderedVersion to the devices. In switch for the current template version.

204 No Content, if the field has changed, the API will return the rendered spec.

Change proposed:
* The parameter name `fleet` is changed to `owner` to be consistent with the metadata field.

Behavior changes:

> * If a device configuration is not yet rendered for some reason, FC will queue the device for rendering and instruct

Reviewer 4: "If a device configuration is not yet available for rendering (e.g. because it it still being fetched from the configuration source), ..." ?

  the device to try again later by returning 202 Accepted.

> The user can find the fully rendered device spec by using the following cmdline command:

Reviewer 4: CLI command?

We are proposing extension mechanisms to this API to allow for more complex configurations where
device labels or name would influence the configuration generated to the device.

https://github.com/flightctl/flightctl/pull/248

#### Expected behavior

When `fleet.spec.template` is updated the Fleet deployment changes, the fleet controller
starts rolling out that update to devices. This update can take long (depending on the upgrade strategy)

When a template is applied to a specific device via the Device API:
* Floating tags for external references (os image, git refs, etc..) get converted to stable tags (hashes),
  this gives flightctl the ability to check images being deployed on devices before the device could auto pick-up
  a floating tag. (i.e. checks verifying the installation of the flightctl agent, and configuration)
* When later in time a device has labels updated, the device controller will queue the device to be re-evaulated,
  for example if a change of fleet owner happens because of the label changes.
* An annotation is added to the device in the form of `fleet-controller/resourceVersion` to track the latest device
  template applied to the device.

> [!NOTE]

> > Devices also maintain a `metadata.resourceVersion` field, this is used to track changes related to re-applying

Reviewer 4: see above; it's the API / database setting it, not the fleet controller.

Author: We will propose resourceVersion to all objects with metadata, just controlled at the storage level to make sure it updates every time. Then we can implement oportunistic concurrency access that we already identified we need with devices. (i.e. when somebody updates labels, but at the same time the fleet controller could be updating the spec...)

          repository: basic-nginx-d3mo
          targetRevision: demo
        name: microshift-manifests
      - configType: GitConfigProviderSpec
        gitRef:
          path: /configuration
          repository: ricky-super-secrets
          targetRevision: main
        name: ricky-super-secrets
      os:
        image: quay.io/flightctl/flightctl-agent-basic-nginx:latest
      systemd:
        matchPatterns:
        - microshift.service
        - crio.service
        - flightctl-agent.service
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-05-09T14:20:21Z"
    status: "False"
    type: OverlappingSelectors
```

#### Device management within a fleet

##### Removing a device from a fleet

A device could be stripped from the labels associating it to a specific fleet, in such
case the `metadata.owner` field will be cleared by the fleet controller, and the device
will need to be manually manage or eventually associated to a different fleet/owner.

##### Changing a device to a different fleet

A device could be moved to a different fleet, in such case the `metadata.owner` field will be updated
by the fleet controller, and the device will be managed by the new fleet.

> This can be performed by modifying device labels to match a new fleet.

Reviewer 4: "by modifying device labels to match a new fleet or modifying the fleet's device selector"?

```mermaid
block-beta
columns 1
  user(["User"])

  space

  block
    frontEndpoint["/device/{name}"]
  end

  user --> frontEndpoint
  frontEndpoint --> user

  space
  block
    metadata
    devSpec["spec"]
    devStatus["status"]
  end

  space

  frontEndpoint --> metadata
  frontEndpoint --> devSpec

  block
     renderedEndpoint["/device/{name}/rendered"]
     statusEndpoint["/device/{name}/status"]
  end

  space

  statusEndpoint --> devStatus
  statusEndpoint --> devStatus
  devSpec --> renderedEndpoint
  renderedEndpoint --> Device
  Device --> statusEndpoint

  Device(["Device"])

  style frontEndpoint fill:#969,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px
  style renderedEndpoint fill:#969,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px
  style statusEndpoint fill:#969,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px
  ```

#### `/device/{name}` User facing method

This endpoint can be accessed by the user or external systems to
manage individual devices, also internally from the fleet specifications
for devices.

The proposed changes include:

* Reincorporating device.spec as a visible part through this frontend API.

* The `device.spec.os.image` contains a reference to the image to be used for the device.

> * The `device.spec.templateVersion` field is moved to `device.metadata.resourceVersion` opaque string identifies

Reviewer 4: In K8s, `resourceVersion` refers to the version of the resource itself (here: the Device), while we want to record the version of the `fleet.spec.template` used to generate the `device.spec`. So that may be confusing.
Also, isn't this a record that the fleet controller keeps about the device? In this case, I believe an annotation would be a better fit, i.e. make this `device.metadata.annotations["fleet-controller/templateVersion"]=...`?

Author: It could make sense also in terms of fully decoupling any Device-> Fleet dependency, while Fleet-->Device Deps are ok, but:

There will be some coupling anyway, for example when we ask for a rendered device, and we provide a past "resourceVersion", to only return on a diff...  https://github.com/flightctl/flightctl/pull/247/files#diff-d194c209c6868d086baff7646aceb9c013396c93149640138a62b12ed02a834cR331

The device API needs to know about this to be resolved.

Asking @avishayt for a quick peek

Reviewer 2: I agree with @fzdarsky.  Is it better than keeping it in the spec?

Reviewer 4: I feel we're conflating two problems / mechanisms here:
1) `.metadata.resourceVersion` as a mechanism to ensure consistency (detect read-modify-write issues) and to get data selectively (see [K8s API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/api-concepts/#resource-versions)). This is the opaque string the agent sends to the service in a param that should be called `resourceVersion` in GET (or maybe even HEAD) requests.
2) The mechanism for the fleet controller to store in a device the version of the _device template_ it used when rendering the device spec the last time. That part shouldn't have a definition in the Device API itself, so an annotation set by the fleet controller is a more natural fit.

Author: I think it's true, we are conflating it. But because the nature of resourceVersion being opaque, we can use it to track the template that was used to render this device, that would just be an implementation detail.

I will keep both, and make the explanation of what "resourceVersion" is more opaque, so we can use the exact same field and mechanism (during GET) as kubernetes does, while still track the original version of the fleet template in the annotation. Depending on the implementation those could match or not, but would leave room for divergence, and also, the same mechanism would be available to use when fleet controller isn't in place.

I'll update and let's see if it all sits in place or if it doesn't.

Reviewer 4: Yes, resourceVersion is opaque, but for opportunistic concurrency control to work, it must be updated on every write to the device resource (incl. label updates), irrespective of whether the fleet's device template changed. So we cannot use it to track the template.

  the version of the device spec, this is used for tracking changes. This is moved from the metadata level, so
  when we write in the spec field, the contents are then not modified by the server.

* The `device.spec.{containers, systemd}` fields are moved under `device.spec.monitoring.{containers, systemd}`

* The `device.spec.monitoring.containers` contains a list of container patterns to be watched on the device (as in the fleet spec)

* The `device.spec.monitoring.systemd` contains a list of systemd service patterns to be watched on the device (as in the fleet spec)

> * The `device.spec.config` contains a list of config items

Reviewer 4: list of zero or more?

Author: I assume that a list has that property: [] or [x] or [x,y,...], but adding it..

Author: Done.

* The config items could be inline definition of config files (`InlineConfigProviderSpec`)

* Some config items reference external configurations (`KubernetesSecretProviderSpec`, `GitConfigProviderSpec`)

* `GitConfigProviderSpec` config types add a `mountPath` field for consistency, in the same way k8s secrets add such field.

* External references (image or config items) must support floating tags (`latest`, `main`, `v1.0`), although
  **when managed from a fleet, the floating tags will be frozen as hashes** on the device spec by the
  fleet controller.

* Some external items are actually non-versioned like the K8s secrets, so are inherently floating.

Complete representation of the proposed device:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1alpha1
kind: Device
metadata:
  name: fab9839018890a88b898b980f8f809f8e8ac333761977d987a777a777a987ccce
  labels:
    site: factory-a
    deviceType: optical-inspector
    stage: production
  owner: Fleet/optical-inspector-production-fleet

>   resourceVersion: "optical-inspector-production-fleet-0000001"  # instead of templateVersion, hiding implementation specific details

Reviewer 4: see comment above

spec:
  os:
    image: quay.io/redhat/rhde:9.2
  config:
    - name: rendered-config
      configType: InlineConfigProviderSpec
      inline:
        ignition:
          version: 3.4.0
        storage:
          files:
            - contents:
                source: >-
                  data:,This%20system%20is%20managed%20by%20flightctl.%0A
              mode: 422
              overwrite: true
              path: "/etc/motd"

    - name: config-from-git
      configType: GitConfigProviderSpec
      repository: my-repo
      ref: v1.0.0
      path: /path/to/config/in/git
      mountPath: /path/to/config/in/device

    - name: config-from-k8s-secret
      configType: KubernetesSecretProviderSpec
      name: my-secret
      namespace: my-namespace
      mountPath: /path/to/config/in/device

  monitoring:
    containers:
      matchPatterns:
        - *my-container*
        - *another-container*

    systemd:
      matchPatterns:
        - chronyd.service
        - firewalld.service
        - sshd*.service

> status:

Reviewer 4: There are some things we'll want to revisit still, like the conditions and the systemInfo. Should we leave those out, so they're not understood as being intended this way?

Author: I agree that will likely change, although those don't affect the behavior of our core API.

I will make a comment explaining that conditions and the systemInfo field is likely to change in the future.

    state "<b>Fleet Device (paused)</b><br/><b>owner</b>: the-matching-fleet<br/><b>spec</b>: user writable // management paused" as Fleet_Paused
    [*] --> Individual_Device
    Individual_Device --> Fleet_Device : matching fleet labels && owner == nil
    Fleet_Device --> Individual_Device : no matching fleet labels
    Fleet_Device --> Fleet_Paused : flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused
    Fleet_Paused--> Fleet_Device: ! flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused
    Fleet_Paused--> Individual_Device: no matching fleet labels
```

##### `/device/{name}` with no owner fleet (Individual Device)

Devices with no matching labels to a fleet are manually managed and start with no `metadata.owner`
reference the fleet controller will not attempt to reconcile or configure the device in any way.

A `metadata.owner` field can be written through the API to associate the device to an external
owner (like ACM or AAP, etc..), and prevent the fleet controller from managing the device in any way.

If a fleet matches this device, and the device has empty `metadata.owner` the fleet controller

> will claim the device, by setting `metadata.owner` to `Fleet/{fleet-name}`.

Reviewer 4: Do we need an API group here?

Reviewer 4: Just wondering whether we should prefix the resource kind `fleet` with an API group and version, e.g. `[core.]v1alpha1/fleet`.

Author: K8s uses that, even allows a list of ownerReferences, for the purpose of recursive deletion in APIs. We don't need that here.

I think it should be up to the owner to select whatever they want as a prefix.

does freeze the tags to hashes, the user is free to setup the device spec with floating references.

###### Expected behaviour regarding external references with floating tags

Changes on external references are monitored and acted on (git branches,
device images, secrets), the device controller should re-evaluate the device
spec and apply the changes to the rendered version which will be exposed
on the `/device/{name}/rendered` endpoint.

Several mechanisms can be used to track external references:
* Polling
* Webhooks

##### `/device/{name}` while managed by a fleet (Fleet Device)

When managing a device through a fleet, flightctl is responsible
for maintaining the device spec in sync with the fleet spec; in this case
*write access is only possible for the modification of labels and other metadata*
through this API except for the owner fleet.

> [!NOTE]
> Devices managed by a fleet have their floating tags resolved to stable hashes at this API
> level. This is done to ensure that the device is always in sync with the fleet spec.

The device will have an owner reference to the managing fleet, i.e.:

```yaml
  owner: Fleet/optical-inspector-production-fleet
```

> ###### Temporarily disabling fleet management (Fleet Device paused)

Reviewer 4: This is part of the fleet controller's concern, so would be more appropriately described in the Fleet API section.

Author: I have also moved the changing fleets , and removing from fleet entries under the fleet umbrella.

A user can temporarily stop fleet management of a device by setting the `flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused`
in the device labels, the fleet manager will ignore devices with this label for any subsequent
update or rollout.

This feature is intended to allow temporarily debugging a device without de-associating
from the fleet. This will mean the `metadata.owner` field is not cleared. 

Devices set to `flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused` with a `metadata.owner` starting
with "Fleet/" must signal a device status condition to indicate that the device is not
being synchronized to the owner fleet.

```yaml
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-30T15:06:20Z"
    message: This device is not in sync with the owner fleet.
    reason: Management Paused from flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused label.
    status: False

>     type: Management

Reviewer 4: This would mean the condition is part of the device spec, but device don't know anything about fleets...

Author: Ok, I will remove it, we would assume it from the label being there.

Author: This makes me wonder if we need some mechanisms to let controllers setup status conditions on devices, may be via a different status field (controllerStatus), and a different endpoint?

I suspect we will need to figure out something for that eventually, because even though we don't want the devices to have knowledge of the controller, there is some status relative to the controller that needs to go into devices (this will be still more evident if we have templating, and suddenly a device cannot be rendered by a template...)

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    state "<b>Individual Device</b><br/><b>owner</b>: nil (API writable)<br/><b>spec:</b> user writable // unmanaged" as Individual_Device
    state "<b>Fleet Device</b><br/><b>owner</b>: the-matching-fleet<br/><b>spec</b>: fleet-controller writable // managed" as Fleet_Device
    state "<b>Fleet Device (paused)</b><br/><b>owner</b>: the-matching-fleet<br/><b>spec</b>: user writable // management paused" as Fleet_Paused
    [*] --> Individual_Device
    Individual_Device --> Fleet_Device : matching fleet labels && owner == nil
    Fleet_Device --> Individual_Device : no matching fleet labels
    Fleet_Device --> Fleet_Paused : flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused
    Fleet_Paused--> Fleet_Device: ! flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused
    Fleet_Paused--> Individual_Device: no matching fleet labels
```

##### `/device/{name}` with no owner fleet (Individual Device)

Devices with no matching labels to a fleet are manually managed and start with no `metadata.owner`
reference; the fleet controller will not attempt to reconcile or configure the device in any way.

A `metadata.owner` field can be written through the API to associate the device to an external

> owner (like ACM or AAP, etc..), and prevent the fleet controller from managing the device in any way.

Reviewer: Should we call out `metadata. owner` has two potential writers the fleet controller and the user? It seemed inferred here.

Author: No, I think it's actually good. The fleet is just a controller of devices, and it uses the devices API, it claims ownership, also external agents claim ownership.

Ownership at some point could be established by TLS identity.. and the fleet controller on this design could talk to the API directly if we want. 

I think it's actually more isolated in terms of API/concerns because of that... external and internal owners work under the same rules, the fleet is just a controller of devices, device API nows nothing of the management (as pods...)

Author: Although, you'd be right on one thing. We are making the RBAC learn that when the fleet controller paused is set ... we keep the owner but still we let the users edit. Should we drop the owner to be fully consistent?

In the end we would still find the matching labels. hmmm

for maintaining the device spec in sync with the fleet spec; in this case
*write access is only possible for the modification of labels and other metadata*
through this API except for the owner fleet.

> [!NOTE]
> Devices managed by a fleet have their floating tags resolved to stable hashes at this API
> level. This is done to ensure that the device is always in sync with the fleet spec.

The device will have an owner reference to the managing fleet, i.e.:

```yaml
  owner: Fleet/optical-inspector-production-fleet
```

#### `/device/{name}/rendered` (device and user read-only)
This endpoint is used by the device agent to retrieve the rendered device spec, this endpoint is
read-only, each device can only access it's own device rendered spec based on the device
certificate identification, a user with admin privileges can access any device rendered spec
for debug purposes.

The agent can pass: `renderedVersion`, this is compared to the `renderedVersion` device
annotation, if this opaque field has not changed the API will return
204 No Content, if the field has changed, the API will return the rendered spec.

Change proposed:

> * The parameter name `fleet` is changed to `owner` to be consistent with the metadata field.

Author: I think knownRenderedVersion is better for expressing the intent/meaning. 👍

#### `/device/{name}/status` (device side)

This endpoint is used by the device agent to report the status of the device, this endpoint is write-only,
each device can only access it's own device status based on the device certificate identification.

The result of this write will be exposed on the `/device/{name}` endpoint as part of the status field.

Reporting to this endpoint also serves as a heartbeat mechanism, the device agent should report the status,
if a device stops reporting to this endpoint in the expected timelines it will be considered offline.

Via this endpoint the device reports `renderedVersion` instead of `templateVersion` to indicate the currently
applied configuration.

### Fleet API

Fleet is an automation layer on top of Device API, the DeviceTemplate is a mechanism to control drift
and enforce policy across devices in a fleet.

A DeviceTemplate is a template for a device spec, it's a way to define group specific configuration.

[We are proposing](https://github.com/flightctl/flightctl/pull/248) extension mechanisms to this API
to allow for more complex configurations where device labels or name would influence the
configuration generated to the device.

> #### `/fleet/{name}` (user facing)

Author: ouch good catches.

the latest template version that is being rolled out, as a `fleet-controller/templateVersion`
annotation in the fleet for observability through the API.

When a template is applied to a specific device via the Device API:
* Floating tags for external references (os image, git refs, etc..) get converted to stable tags (hashes),
  this gives flightctl the ability to check images being deployed on devices before the device could auto pick-up
  a floating tag. (i.e. checks verifying the installation of the flightctl agent, and configuration)
* When later in time a device has labels updated, the device controller will queue the device to be re-evaulated,
  for example if a change of fleet owner happens because of the label changes.
* An `annotation` is added to the device in the form of `fleet-controller/templateVersion` to track the latest device
  template applied to the device.

TemplateVersions are exposed via the API as read-only objects, they can be used to track changes to the fleet
spec and the external references that were frozen on the devices:

* `/fleet/{name}/templateversions` - This endpoint enables listing of `TemplateVersion` objects for the fleet.

> * `/fleet/{name}/templateversions/{version}` - This endpoint returns a specific `TemplateVersion` object for the fleet.

Author: True, I was sure I had edited that back. I'll put it back.

#### Device management within a fleet

##### Removing a device from a fleet

A device could be stripped from the labels associating it to a specific fleet, in such
case the `metadata.owner` field will be cleared by the fleet controller, and the device

> will need to be manually manage or eventually associated to a different fleet/owner.

Reviewer: How will we handle the potential case of certs expiring while the device is unmanaged? Or will the device even if unmanaged always be able to send a CSR to the flightctrl service. Not sure if we need to cover that at all here.

Author: Yes, a device being connected to the system means that we will renew the certificates, it's an orthogonal process as @avishayt said.

Then... while the device is managed by the system... it could be individual, an not managed by a fleet.

Author: I am making it clear by proposing a small change:

the device **spec** will need to be manually managed.

##### Changing a device to a different fleet

A device could be moved to a different fleet, in such case the `metadata.owner` field will be updated
by the fleet controller, and the device will be managed by the new fleet.

This can be performed by modifying device labels to match a new fleet or modifying the fleet's device
selector.

##### Temporarily disabling fleet management (Fleet Device paused)

A user can temporarily stop fleet management of a device by setting the `flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused`
in the device labels, the fleet manager will ignore devices with this label for any subsequent
update or rollout.

This feature is intended to allow temporarily debugging a device without de-associating

> from the fleet. This will mean the `metadata.owner` field is not cleared.

Reviewer: This means the device will be guaranteed to not receive any templateVersion update from the service if paused?

Author: Right.

this detail is exposed via the `/device/{name}/rendered` endpoint.

Several mechanisms can be used to track external references:
* Polling
* Webhooks

##### `/devices/{name}` while managed by a fleet (Fleet Device)

When managing a device through a fleet, flightctl is responsible
for maintaining the device spec in sync with the fleet spec; in this case
*write access is only possible for the modification of labels and other metadata*
through this API except for the owner fleet.

> [!NOTE]
> Devices managed by a fleet have their floating tags resolved to stable hashes at this API
> level. This is done to ensure that the device is always in sync with the fleet spec.

The device will have an owner reference to the managing fleet, i.e.:

```yaml
  owner: Fleet/optical-inspector-production-fleet
```

#### `/devices/{name}/rendered` (device and user read-only)
This endpoint is used by the device agent to retrieve the rendered device spec, this endpoint is
read-only, each device can only access it's own device rendered spec based on the device
certificate identification, a user with admin privileges can access any device rendered spec
for debug purposes.

> 

Author: `renderedVersion` is a monotonically increasing counter.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1alpha1
kind: Fleet
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2024-04-30T14:06:17Z"
  generation: 1
  labels: {}
  name: optical-inspector-production-fleet
  owner: ResourceSync/basic-nginx-r3sourcesync
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      device: optical-inspector
  template:
    metadata:
      generation: 1
    spec:
      config:
      - configType: InlineConfigProviderSpec
        inline:
          ignition:
            version: 3.4.0
          storage:
            files:
            - contents:
                source: data:,This%20system%20is%20managed%20by%20flightctl.%0A
              mode: 422
              overwrite: true
              path: /etc/motd
        name: motd-update
      - configType: GitConfigProviderSpec
        gitRef:
          path: /basic-nginx-demo/configuration
          repository: basic-nginx-d3mo
          targetRevision: demo
        name: microshift-manifests
      - configType: GitConfigProviderSpec
        gitRef:
          path: /configuration
          repository: ricky-super-secrets
          targetRevision: main
        name: ricky-super-secrets
      os:
        image: quay.io/flightctl/flightctl-agent-basic-nginx:latest

>       systemd:

Author: ```suggestion
      monitoring:
          systemd:
```

        matchPatterns:
        - microshift.service
        - crio.service
        - flightctl-agent.service
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-05-09T14:20:21Z"
    status: "False"
    type: OverlappingSelectors
```

#### Expected behavior

> [!NOTE]
> This section dives into the implementation details of the fleet controller, the `TemplateVersion`
> is an internal object that is used to track changes to fleet spec device templates and source references.
> It is useful to provide an audit trail of the changes to the fleet templates and sources.
> It's also useful to enable implementations where offline devices can traverse a
> history of configurations to reach the current state.

When `fleet.spec.template` is updated the Fleet deployment changes, a copy of the device template
is stored as a `TemplateVersion` object. This object freezes a copy of the template and also creates
a list of external references (like git refs, image tags, etc..) that are floating tags by scanning

> all fleet devices, these floating tags are resolved to stable hashes and stored in (or along)

Author: Be more explicit about secret handling since we can't get older versions from k8s

Author: Ok we agreed not to be more explicit here, but will be an implementation detail.

the `TemplateVersion` object.

When a previously frozen source changes, a new copy of `TemplateVersion` object is created
with the updated source reference.

> 

Author: new device with new source/ref (not modifying existing one)

and the fleet controller will not proceed with the rollout.

Once a `TemplateVersion` is created the fleet controller starts rolling out that update to devices.
This update can take a long time (depending on the upgrade strategy). The fleet controller marks
the latest template version that is being rolled out, as a `fleet-controller/templateVersion`
annotation in the fleet for observability through the API.

When a template is applied to a specific device via the Device API:
* Floating tags for external references (os image, git refs, etc..) get converted to stable tags (hashes),
  this gives flightctl the ability to check images being deployed on devices before the device could auto pick-up
  a floating tag. (i.e. checks verifying the installation of the flightctl agent, and configuration)
* When later in time a device has labels updated, the device controller will queue the device to be re-evaulated,
  for example if a change of fleet owner happens because of the label changes.
* An `annotation` is added to the device in the form of `fleet-controller/templateVersion` to track the latest device

>   template applied to the device.

Author: ```suggestion
  `TemplateVersion` applied to the device.
```

TemplateVersions are exposed via the API as read-only objects, they can be used to track changes to the fleet
spec and the external references that were frozen on the devices:

> * `/templateversions` - This endpoint enables listing and cleanup of
>                        `TemplateVersion` objects. Allows filtering by labels and owner.

Author: ```suggestion
* `/fleets/{name}/templateversions` - This endpoint enables listing and cleanup of
                       `TemplateVersion` objects. Allows filtering by labels.
```

> * `/fleet/{name}/templateversions/{version}` - This endpoint returns a specific `TemplateVersion` object for the fleet.

Author: ```suggestion
* `/fleets/{name}/templateversions/{version}` - This endpoint returns a specific `TemplateVersion` object for the fleet.
```

> * `/fleet/{name}/templateversions/{version}` - This endpoint returns a specific `TemplateVersion` object for the fleet.

Author: ```suggestion
* `/templateversions/{version}` - This endpoint returns a specific `TemplateVersion` object.
```

#### Device management within a fleet

##### Removing a device from a fleet

A device could be stripped from the labels associating it to a specific fleet, in such
case the `metadata.owner` field will be cleared by the fleet controller, and the device
spec will need to be manually managed or eventually associated to a different fleet/owner.

##### Changing a device to a different fleet

A device could be moved to a different fleet, in such case the `metadata.owner` field will be updated
by the fleet controller, and the device will be managed by the new fleet.

This can be performed by modifying device labels to match a new fleet or modifying the fleet's device
selector.

> 

Author: The fleet controller should apply the latest template version for the new fleet to the device spec.

##### Temporarily disabling fleet management (Fleet Device paused)

> A user can temporarily stop fleet management of a device by setting the `flightctl.io/fleet-controller=paused`

Author: ```suggestion
A user can temporarily stop fleet management of a device by setting the `fleet-controller=paused`
```

in the device labels, the fleet manager will ignore devices with this label for any subsequent
update or rollout.

This feature is intended to allow temporarily debugging a device without de-associating
from the fleet. This will mean the `metadata.owner` field is not cleared.

> **QUESTION:** Should we clear the `metadata.owner` to be fully consistent with the fact
> that the device API must not know about the fleet controller label, and allow the user
> to edit/or not the device spec only based on the status of the `metadata.owner` field?
>
> A device would still be know to be part of a fleet by the labels.

> At this point the device will not recive updates from new `TemplateVersions` generated

Author: ```suggestion
At this point the device will not receive updates from new `TemplateVersions` generated
```

from a fleet, and the API will allow editing the device spec.

When a fleet owned device is moved back to fleet management (the label is cleared)
the fleet controller will rollout (or back) the device spec to the fleet

> mandated configuration, and remove any modifications manually made to the device spec.

Author: update based on .owner field conversation.

### Resource versioning and propagation

Fleets provide an annotation in the form of `fleet-controller/templateVersion`,

> this field is used to track the last capture of the fleet device spec, or the sources.

Author: ```suggestion
this field is used to track the last TemplateVersion that has been rolled out.
```

Fleet applied templates are tracked transparently on the devices via an annotation 
`fleet-controller/templateVersion`, this will be the latest `templateVersion` of the
Fleet referenced by the owner field that has been applied to the device.

In addition devices have a `renderedVersion` annotation in metadata, this field is used to track
changes to the resulting rendered spec seen by the device, this field can change under the
following circumstances:

* The device spec has been modified by the fleet controller or the user:
  * Due to changes in the fleet template.
  * Due to changes in floating changes referenced by the fleet template, but frozen on the device spec
  * Due to changes of fleet

>   * Due to changes in labels (see PR#248)

Author: better wording

7) The device finds a new rendered spec via the `/device/{name}/rendered` endpoint.
8) The device controller reports the new `renderedVersion` on the `/device/{name}/status` endpoint.

##### External fleet references changes
1) A fleet external reference changes (e.g. a git ref, or an image tag).
2) A new `TemplateVersion` object is created, with the updated reference.
3) The `fleet-controller/templateVersion` annotation is updated on the fleet.
4) The fleet controller starts rolling out the new template to devices.
5) When a device is applied the new template, the `fleet-controller/templateVersion` annotation is added to the device.
6) The device controller re-renders the device spec and updates the `renderedVersion` annotation.
7) The device finds a new rendered spec via the `/device/{name}/rendered` endpoint.
8) The device controller reports the new `renderedVersion` on the `/device/{name}/status` endpoint.

##### External device reference changes
1) A device external reference changes (e.g. a git ref, or an image tag).
2) The device controller re-renders the device spec and updates the `renderedVersion` annotation.

> 3) The device finds a new rendered spec via the `/device/{name}/rendered` endpoint.

Author: * audit-log for renderedVersion?

2) The device controller re-renders the device spec and updates the `renderedVersion` annotation.
3) The device finds a new rendered spec via the `/device/{name}/rendered` endpoint.
4) The device controller reports the new `renderedVersion` on the `/device/{name}/status` endpoint.

### User Stories

#### Story 1
As an IT user, I want to manage several devices used for different purposes, those
devices don't share the similar configuration and image with other devices.

#### Story 2
As an IT user, I want to manage a small number of MicroShift devices individually
via RHACM, similar to how I manage OpenShift clusters and SNOs.

#### Story 3
As an IT user, I want to manage several RHEL devices declaratively via AAP, so
I can orchestrate very complex update workflows.

#### Story 4
As an IT user, I want to be able to easily get a device’s spec via the CLI,
so I can compare it with the device template and verify how external references
have been frozen.

#### Story 5
As an IT user, I want to pause fleet management on specific devices, so I can
perform manual changes on the spec for debugging purposes without the fleet
controller rolling back the changes.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

> We would need to identify the design changes relative to templateVersions and
> if the relationship of those continues to be to the fleet or device level, specially in relation to
> https://github.com/flightctl/flightctl/pull/248

Author: ```suggestion

```

* The config items could be inline definition of config files (`InlineConfigProviderSpec`)

* Some config items reference external configurations (`KubernetesSecretProviderSpec`, `GitConfigProviderSpec`)

* `GitConfigProviderSpec` config types add a `mountPath` field for consistency, in the same way k8s secrets add such field.

* External references (image or config items) must support floating tags (`latest`, `main`, `v1.0`), although
  **when managed from a fleet, the floating tags will be frozen as hashes** on the device spec by the
  fleet controller.

* Some external items are actually non-versioned like the K8s secrets, so are inherently floating.

Complete representation of the proposed device:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1alpha1
kind: Device
metadata:
  name: fab9839018890a88b898b980f8f809f8e8ac333761977d987a777a777a987ccce
  labels:
    site: factory-a
    deviceType: optical-inspector
    stage: production
  annotations:
    fleet-controller/templateVersion: "optical-inspector-production-fleet-0000001" # the fleet controller uses this annotation to track the latest template applied
  owner: Fleet/optical-inspector-production-fleet

>   resourceVersion: "somehash" # provides oportunistic concurrency control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  resourceVersion: "somehash" # provides opportunistic concurrency control
```

certificate to contain the owner identity, or be passed as a header from the API gateway.
This means that the fleet-controller is the only one being able to claim a device to Fleet/
or to release a device claimed by a fleet.

External controllers dealing with devices can only set the `metadata.owner` field
to the authentication-allowed {owner} namespace.

If a fleet matches this device, and the device has empty `metadata.owner` the fleet controller
will claim the device, by setting `metadata.owner` to `Fleet/{fleet-name}`.

If a fleet stops matching a device or if the fleet controller is paused on a device,
`metadata.owner` is cleared by the fleet controller, and the device becomes manually managed.

The `os.image` and configuration fields in this API support floating tags, and while the fleet manager
does freeze the tags to hashes, the user is free to setup the device spec with floating references.

Every time the device is updated in any way, the `metadata.resourceVersion` field is updated.

Every time the device spec changes, the device controller will generate a new device rendered
configuration, and update the `metadata.annotation['renderedVersion']` field.

> ###### Expected behaviour regarding external references with floating tags

Reviewer: s/behaviour/behavior

This update can take a long time (depending on the upgrade strategy). The fleet controller marks
the latest template version that is being rolled out, as a `fleet-controller/templateVersion`
annotation in the fleet for observability through the API.

When a template is applied to a specific device via the Device API:
* Floating tags for external references (os image, git refs, etc..) get converted to stable tags (hashes),
  this gives flightctl the ability to check images being deployed on devices before the device could auto pick-up
  a floating tag. (i.e. checks verifying the installation of the flightctl agent, and configuration)
* When later in time a device has labels updated, the device controller will queue the device to be re-evaulated,
  for example if a change of fleet owner happens because of the label changes.
* An `annotation` is added to the device in the form of `fleet-controller/templateVersion` to track
  the latest `TemplateVersion` applied to the device.

TemplateVersions are exposed via the API as read-only objects, they can be used to track changes to the fleet
spec and the external references that were frozen on the devices:

> * `/fleet/{name}/templateversions` - This endpoint enables listing and cleanup of

Author: ```suggestion
* `/fleets/{name}/templateversions` - This endpoint enables listing and cleanup of
```

                                     `TemplateVersion` objects. Allows filtering by labels.

> * `/fleet/{name}/templateversions/{version}` - This endpoint returns a specific `TemplateVersion` object for the fleet.

Author: ```suggestion
* `/fleets/{name}/templateversions/{version}` - This endpoint returns a specific `TemplateVersion` object for the fleet.
```

3) The device finds a new rendered spec via the `/devices/{name}/rendered` endpoint.
4) The device controller reports the new `renderedVersion` on the `/devices/{name}/status` endpoint.

### User Stories

#### Story 1
As an IT user, I want to manage several devices used for different purposes, those
devices don't share the similar configuration and image with other devices.

#### Story 2
As an IT user, I want to manage a small number of MicroShift devices individually
via RHACM, similar to how I manage OpenShift clusters and SNOs.

#### Story 3
As an IT user, I want to manage several RHEL devices declaratively via AAP, so
I can orchestrate very complex update workflows.

#### Story 4
As an IT user, I want to be able to easily get a device’s spec via the CLI,
so I can compare it with the device template and verify how external references
have been frozen.

#### Story 5
As an IT user, I want to pause fleet management on specific devices, so I can
perform manual changes on the spec for debugging purposes without the fleet
controller rolling back the changes.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

Devices don't keep track of the rendered specs and sources over time. This could be captured

> so far by emiting event logs. This could be extended in the feature to provide better traceability

Reviewer: s/emiting/emitting

  device. (See the fleet API section for more details)

* The `device.spec.{containers, systemd}` fields are moved under `device.spec.monitoring.{containers, systemd}`

* The `device.spec.monitoring.containers` contains a list of container patterns to be watched on the device (as in the fleet spec)

* The `device.spec.monitoring.systemd` contains a list of systemd service patterns to be watched on the device (as in the fleet spec)

* The `device.spec.config` contains a list of zero or more config items.

* The config items could be inline definition of config files (`InlineConfigProviderSpec`)

* Some config items reference external configurations (`KubernetesSecretProviderSpec`, `GitConfigProviderSpec`)

* `GitConfigProviderSpec` config types add a `mountPath` field for consistency, in the same way k8s secrets add such field.

* External references (image or config items) must support floating tags (`latest`, `main`, `v1.0`), although
  **when managed from a fleet, the floating tags will be frozen as hashes** on the device spec by the
  fleet controller.

* Some external items are actually non-versioned like the K8s secrets, so are inherently floating.

> * The `device.status.conditions` field can be updated by the `device-controller` to provide status information

Reviewer 4: I'm not clear what we mean with `device-controller` here, but would like to ensure we're on the same page that there is nothing else on the write path of agent --> API server --> DB when it comes to status updates.

Only the agent knows and can set the device `.status` fields indicating the update phase it is in (preparing to update, updating, rebooting, success or rollback&failure), reports this to the API server who adds the "last seen" info. At that point we have all info to display the "device status" information in the UI/API.

Author: It is what we discussed 2 days ago with avishay on a meeting, that sometimes the device controller (updating the rendered spec) needs to set conditions visible through the API. (i.e. a source is not found now... ).

We have in logical terms a `fleet-controller` that updates device specs based on fleet definitions,
And we have a `device-controller` that makes sure that the rendered spec is up to date with the sources provided in the device spec (and in the case of standalone devices , we use floating tags too).

Author: Let me try to phrase it more clearly.
